DESSERTS

*Banana cake*


Prep:10min  ›  Cook:35min  ›  Ready in:45min 


Ingredients:

125g butter
150g caster sugar
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 egg, beaten
2 very ripe bananas, mashed
190g self raising flour
60ml milk
 

Method:

1-Grease and line a 2lb loaf tin. Melt butter, sugar and vanilla in a saucepan over a medium heat.
2-Remove from heat and add the mashed bananas, mix well.
3-Add the egg, mix well.
4-Stir in the flour and the milk.
5-Pour into the prepared tin, sprinkle with a tablespoon of demerara sugar to give a crunch topping if liked.
6-Bake at 170 C / Fan 150 C / Gas 3 for 35 minutes, or until a skewer comes out clean. Leave to cool and enjoy!


*Banofee pie*


Prep:3hr30min  ›  Ready in:3hr30min


Ingredients:

For the caramel filling
1 (397g) tin full cream condensed milk

For the base
100g (4 oz) butter
250g (9 oz) crushed good quality shortbread fingers

For the topping
2 bananas
1 (284ml) pot double cream, whipped
Flake bar, crumbled (to decorate)


 

Method:

1-To make the caramel: Bring a saucepan 3/4 filled with water to a boil and put the can of milk in it. Simmer in the boiling water for 3 hours, paying attention to add water for when it evaporates. When opened, it will transform in caramel.
2-To make the base: Melt the butter in a large saucepan and stir in the crushed shortbread of your choice.
3-Press into the base and sides of 23 cm (9") cake or flan tin. Chill for about 40 minutes.
4-Pour the caramel over biscuit base, let it cool. Meanwhile, slice the bananas and arrange on top of the layer of caramel.
5-Chill for about an hour until firm.
6-Decorate with whipped cream and a crumbled flake. Add more freshly sliced banana, if you like!


/*DRINKs*/

*banana milkshake*

Ingredients:

Makes: 1 milkshake

  
2 medium frozen bananas
2 scoops vanilla ice cream
generous sprinkling ground cinnamon
1 teaspoon honey
3/4 glass of milk
few scoops chocolate milk power (optional)


Method:

Prep:5min  ›  Ready in:5min 

1-Throw bananas, ice cream, cinnamon, honey, milk and chocolate powder (if using) into a blender and blitz until smooth (hand blenders work great too). Serve immediately..
 



*Banana lassi*

Ingredients

Serves: 2 

2 ripe bananas, broken into pieces
225g plain yoghurt
80ml milk, or more as needed
2 ice cubes
2 tablespoons caster sugar, or to taste

Method

Prep:10min  ›  Ready in:10min 

1-Blend bananas, yoghurt, milk, ice cubes and sugar together in a blender until smooth.


/*Main courses*/

*Fragrant spiced chicken with banana sambal*


Ingredients
Serves: 6 

    2 large onion
    Onion, quartered
    4 garlic clove
    thumb-sized piece ginger, peeled and roughly chopped
    600ml reduced-salt chicken stock
    1 tsp ground coriander
    1 tsp ground cumin
    ½ tsp ground turmeric
    4 green cardamom pod
    1 large red chilli, deseeded and finely chopped
    2 tbsp ground almond
    2 tbsp tomato purée
    500g skinless chicken breast, cubed
    small pack coriander, chopped

For the sambal and rice (to serve 2, easily doubled)
1 small red onion, finely chopped
¼ cucumber, peeled, deseeded and diced
1 small banana, diced
zest and juice ½ lime
 250g pack ready-cooked brown basmati rice


Method

Prep:15min  ›  Cook:45  ›  Ready in:1hr00min 

1-Put the onions in a food processor with the garlic and ginger. Blitz until it is as smooth as possible, then pour in half the stock and blitz again.
2-Heat a large non-stick pan, sprinkle in the spices and toast for 1 min. Pour in the onion mixture, the remaining stock and all but ½ tsp of the chopped chilli. Add the almonds and tomato purée, and stir well. Simmer for 35 mins until completely soft, stirring every now and then and adding a little water if the mixture starts to catch on the bottom of the pan.
3-Add the chicken and half the fresh coriander. Heat very gently for 10 mins to cook the chicken through. Mix all the sambal ingredients with the remaining coriander and chilli, and heat the rice following pack instructions. Serve the chicken and sambal with the brown rice.
    


*Jerk pulled pork with banana salsa*

Ingredients
200g sea salt
300g dark muscovado sugar
2kg piece boned shoulder of pork, trimmed of rind, but leave fat
4 tbsp jerk seasoning (we used Bart), mixed with 2 tsp ground cinnamon
150ml pineapple juice
50g treacle
2 x 400g cans black beans, drained and rinsed well
lots of soft flour tortillas (2-3 per person depending on size and appetites)
big pot of natural yogurt and shredded lettuce, to serve (optional)

For the banana salsa

3 medium banana firm to ripe, peeled and cut into 1cm cubes
1 red onion, finely diced
2 just-ripe avocados
juice 1 lemon
juice 2 limes
1-2 red chillies, deseeded and diced
small pack coriander, stalks finely chopped, leaves roughly chopped



Method

Prep:1h00  ›  Cook:7hr  ›  Ready in:8h00
1-The day before, mix the sea salt and 200g of the sugar in a large food bag. Add the pork and coat it well, then leave it in the fridge overnight.
2-The next day, remove the pork and wipe the meat down with kitchen paper to remove any excess sugar or salt. Rub 3 tbsp of the jerk spices all over and sit the meat on a rack, in a roasting tin. Leave to marinate a little in the fridge, then 30 mins before you start cooking, bring it out to room temperature.
3- Heat oven to 140C/120C fan/gas 1. Mix together the remaining 100g sugar with the pineapple juice, the remaining jerk spices and treacle, and rub half over the pork. Pour the other half into the tin and roast for 6 hrs. Baste the meat with the juices and roast for 1 hr more until the outside is charred and the inside tender. Rest the pork on a platter for 20 mins and pour any juices from the tin into a fat-separating jug.
4- Put the diced banana in a bowl with the onion. Stone, peel and dice the avocados and add these, too. Mix in the lemon and lime juice, chillies, coriander stalks and leaves, and some seasoning
5- Heat the black beans in a microwave, and warm the tortillas following pack instructions. Add a couple of forks to the pork for shredding, discard the fat from the tin juices, and serve the rest alongside for pouring. Serve the pork with the wraps, beans, banana salsa, yogurt and shredded lettuce, if you like.




/*Salad*/


*Thai prawns with banana and cucumber salsa*

 Ingredients
Serves: 4 

    2 bananas, peeled and thinly sliced
    2 cucumbers - peeled, seeded and diced
    10 fresh mint leaves, chopped
    1/2 bunch fresh coriander, chopped
    1 teaspoon finely chopped root ginger

    1 fresh red chilli, thinly sliced
    4 tablespoons lime juice
    1 tablespoon fish sauce
    1 tablespoon dark brown soft sugar
    675g (1 1/2 lb) tiger prawns, peeled and deveined


Method
Prep:15min  ›  Cook:3min  ›  Ready in:18min 

    1-In a large bowl, mix bananas, cucumbers, mint, coriander, ginger and red chilli to make salsa.
    2-In a small bowl, blend lime juice, fish sauce and brown sugar until sugar has dissolved. Thoroughly mix into the salsa.
    3-Bring a large saucepan of lightly salted water to the boil. Place prawns in the water, and cook 3 minutes, or until flesh is opaque. Serve with the banana salsa.


/*Bananas with mango & passion fruit caramel*/


Ingredients

juice of 1 large orange
200g golden caster sugar
4 ripe passion fruit
1 medium-sized ripe mango, peeled and thinly sliced
4 firm large bananas
1 large lime, grated zest and juice

Method

Prep:25min  ›  Cook:5min  ›  Ready in:30min

1-In a small pan, bring the orange juice and 140g/5oz of the sugar slowly to the boil. Cut the passion fruit in half and scoop the pulp into the pan. Stir in the mango slices and when the mixture has reached boiling point again, remove the pan from the heat.
2- Peel the bananas and slice each one diagonally into five. Pour the lime juice over the banana slices and set aside. Sprinkle the remaining sugar evenly over the base of a large heavy-based frying pan. Place the pan over a medium heat until the sugar has dissolved and turned into a golden caramel. Toss the bananas into the pan and leave for 3-4 minutes, turning once.
3-Turn the heat down and stir in the passion fruit and mango mixture. Heat for a further 2 minutes then spoon into bowls. Serve warm with a sprinkling of lime zest. Can be made up to a day ahead and chilled, then gently reheated before serving.





/*breakfast*/


 *Banana pancakes*

Ingredients

1 large banana
2 medium eggs
Eggs, beaten
pinch of baking powder
 splash of vanilla extract
1 tsp oil
25g pecans, roughly chopped
125g raspberries

Method
Prep:5min  ›  Cook:5min  ›  Ready in:10min
1-In a bowl, mash the banana with a fork until it resembles a thick purée. Stir in the eggs, baking powder and vanilla.
2-Heat a large non-stick frying pan or pancake pan over a medium heat and brush with half the oil. Using half the batter, spoon two pancakes into the pan, cook for 1-2 mins each side, then tip onto a plate. Repeat the process with the remaining oil and batter. Top the pancakes with the pecans and raspberries


*Cinnamon porridge with banana & berries*


Ingredients

100g porridge oats
½ tsp cinnamon, plus extra to serve
4 tsp demerara sugar
450ml skimmed milk
3 banana, sliced
400g punnet strawberries, hulled and halved
150g pot fat-free natural yogurt

Method
Prep:15min  ›  Cook:5min  ›  Ready in:20min

1-In a medium-sized saucepan, mix the oats, cinnamon, sugar, milk and half the sliced bananas. Bring to the boil, stirring occasionally. Turn down the heat and cook for 4-5 mins, stirring all the time.
2-Remove and divide between 4 bowls, top with the remaining banana, strawberries, a dollop of yogurt and a sprinkle of cinnamon




